---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

My first exposure to Scrum was back in 2012 when I was involved in working alongside a Scrum team. I was asked to help translate Spanish into English for a company that was building a Tourist Information website. At that time, admittedly, I wasn't really sure how Scrum was being used exactly. I just knew that the Scrum team held regular events, and together they discussed a reflected on their work. Having spent time in the Parachute Regiment in the British Army, I remember thinking in contrast how impressive the camaraderie was amongst Scrum teams, and how keen everyone seemed to be in wanting to improve and find better ways of working. When the company offered me a full time position, this was when I started to branch out into other areas within the company. I ended working within the Scrum team and shadowing their existing Scrum Master, I soon decided that becoming a Scrum Master was what I wanted to pursue. I have since, become hooked, and focused on Software Development ever since. I've been an Agile enthusiast for over 5 years now, with a particular interest in Scrum.

By accompanying Scrum with other practices from; XP, Kanban and Lean Software, it has helped me maximise the advantage of using Scrum as a light framework. Allowing me, the teams, and organisations that I've worked with to become more transparent in the work we do, creating the ability for us to inspect the work we've done, and finally allowing us to adapt so that we can make improvements in the way we work, and improvements to the products/services that we deliver. I enjoy coaching and promoting Agile (as a mindset and in the practical sense of the word). I'm interested in the people side of change, always looking to better understand human behavioural differences, and continue to stay humble in my approach towards becoming a better servant leader.
