---
layout: post
title:  "Customers & Quality | Even More Important Than You Think"
date: 2017-07-28 20:33:00
categories:
tags:
image: /assets/article_images/2017-07-28-customers-and-quality-are-even-more-important-than-you-think/customers-and-quality-are-even-more-important-than-you-think.JPG
image2: /assets/article_images/2017-07-28-customers-and-quality-are-even-more-important-than-you-think/customers-and-quality-are-even-more-important-than-you-think-mobile.JPG 
---
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">I think it's quite evident that years ago in the 1940's and 50's, it was some what of a consumption economy driven period. Companies would build and produce products and services, and the customers would then purchase them. The products and services that were produced back then, in comparison to todays world, seem basic and almost rudimental in design. Fast forward 40-50 years, and customers levels of expectation have shot throught the roof and on a constant rise. Companies competing with one another, each trying to portray their product or services as being something more, something better. This time customers aren't just purchasing a product or service, they're getting the brand and the experience that comes with it. Although this experience driven world is very much among us, and we can see it everywhere we look as there are leading groups of brands in almost every industry. When we associate ourselves with brands, it can provide us with an experience and a sense of belonging - as customers and end users, are our levels of expectancy starting to out grow the experience driven economy? Are the levels of expectancy growing to an extent that we now no longer just want a quality product with an experience, we want to be apart of it and control it!<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Listed below are just 4 ways in how using an agile approach to project delivery can help in keeping up with the high expectancy levels of todays customers:<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

# Delivering The Right Thing Fast
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The benchmark for producing any quality software in todays world is pretty high. It depends on being able to create and utilise a short feedback loop that is fed from various stakeholders, customers and end users. Implementing this feedback will not only depend on having the right team in place, but also good guidance is required in order to form of development processes for the team to follow. Agile works best when there is flexibility coupled with lean processes, keep what's essential and get rid of anything else! Less time, less work effort, less costs, and the ability to deliver FAST without comprising on quality!<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">


# Taking Small Reversible Steps
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Engineering techniques such as '_Test-driven Development_' (TDD), this is where the first test written fails, which is the expected result since the tests are written first, and then the code to accompany the test. This helps in many ways, one of them is that it avoids a lot of potential regression issues, and can be used to help build a reliable test suite. '_Pair Programming_' is another great example of a good engineering practice. This can be beneficial when there are new joiners to the team and they need to get up to speed. When delivering vertical slices (i.e. shippable software after each Sprint), it might be worth it at times to pair up back-end resources with the front end engineers to help ensure that full feature delivery is done correctly. Pair programming shouldn't be thought of as the work effort of 2 people, but as the avoided rework of 4 people.<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

# Increase Reliability
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Customers and end users are becoming increasingly less tolerant of errors and crashes that can be found in software. Take mobile apps for example, it’s often the case where if a user has downloaded an App but it keeps freezing, fails to work, or is just incredibly slow, then users will just end up deleting the app and start searching for another alternative. Using agile frameworks such as '_Scrum_', with it's multiple cycles of building, testing and quality assurance, enables the app developers to build in more quality and reliability through planned repeated cycles of testing within each Sprint cycle.<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

# Responsive to Technology Changes
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Desktop and mobile technology such as, new operating systems, existing feature updates and enhancements all move at an extremely fast pace. Being agile can help keep up with this by welcoming changes to the project and in turn takes advantage of having frequent releases, with the added ability to pivot and change focus (if/when necessary) at the end of each Sprint. As a result, this makes it easier for new updates and enhancements to be introduced into a LIVE production environment, and can be much more responsive to these types of technology changes.<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

# Iterating on Feedback
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Combining the use of Sprints with the typical software update model of desktops and mobile apps, means that comments about new features and enhancements gained from the feedback can be implemented easily. Agile enables the ability to keep a continuous process of iterating and updating, because the design, planning, development and testing (including against the compatibility of any old existing data) are all done within the Sprint cycle.<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

# Conclusion
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
Just to end with a few thoughts about quality in software:<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Quality shouldn't be an afterthought, think about quality from the get go. It should be getting baked in, not stuck on at the end.<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Never comprise on quality thinking it will save time, it always catches you up.<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">When Iterate on feedback from the customers and end users, whilst keeping the feedback loop short, regular and consistent.<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
To read more about how agile can help towards keeping up with the high levels of expectancies, and how to deliver better quality products faster - check out [Taking Advantage of Being Agile](http://jackreed.eu/2017/07/21/taking-advantage-of-being-agile.html).<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
Thanks for making it this far. If you have read this and found any of it useful at all, or know someone that might? Then feel free to share.</span>
