---
layout: post
title:  "Retrospectives | Convincing Ourselves & Others To Consider Change"
date: 2017-08-21 17:00:00
categories:
tags:
image: /assets/article_images/2017-08-21-retrospectives/retrospectives.JPG
image2: /assets/article_images/2017-08-21-retrospectives/retrospectives-mobile.JPG
---

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Just a few important factors that you might want to consider during your next retrospective:

# Better Questions
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Progress usually starts with asking questions, questions that lead to a better understanding: '_What went well in the last Sprint?_', '_Was the expected work completed, if not why?_' or if it was a failed sprint the team might be keen to ask '_How did this happen?_', '_How can we stop this from happening again?_', '_How can we improve?_'. All these types of questions play a key part in convincing ourselves, and others to consider change. It's important to review quantitative and qualitative data, I think the use of Agile metrics deserves it's own post so I'll stay focused non-numerical data for now. I believe the best place to start and first thing to consider, be genuinely interested and listen to others when they respond to a question, as this shows mutual respect, and can help towards creating a safe environment for conversation.

# Assumptions Holding Us Back
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">I'd also be mindful of the fact that sometimes when it comes to generating insights and ideas for change, people can often hold back because of their assumptions. Some classic examples of this can be when someone works within a big organisation, and they assume that because they are just one of many other employees, and that their ideas and opinions won't make a difference. Another example could be when someone assumes that if an idea of theirs is considered a bad one, then they might get laughed at. People sometimes hold back on putting forward an idea, simply because they assume that they'll just be creating additional work effort for themselves, and will be made responsible of making that idea work. All of the above examples probably go unnoticed more so in larger organisations, especially when there can be a lot of employees that have been there for a long time. They may of course be those employees that want to just show up at work, do their job (or at least what they are used to doing), get paid, then go home. In a Scrum team, due to the nature of the team working so cohesively, constantly inspecting and adapting the way they work to improve. It ends being noticeable straight away if a team member doesn't share the same mindset as everyone else on the team. Scrum teams should feel empowered to contribute towards ideas for change without any negative assumptions, it should be in their vested interest to succeed, since they all share the responsibility for improvement.

# Avoid 'Dumb' Incentives
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Setting commitments and reviewing previous commitments are often overlooked, but are an important aspect of the retrospective. When we set commitments that are exciting to us and we believe that they are attainable, then it can become extremely motivating for us to want to take action towards that desired commitment. However, I don't think it is a good idea to attempt to incentivize members of any Agile team by way of offering financial reward, or any reward in fact, just for carrying out what is expected from them in terms of their job duties. Overtime, this will contribute towards them only producing what is needed in order to obtain that reward. If incentives of any kind are to be rewarded, then I think they should be based on the successful achievements of the team or organisation, and not the individual.

# It Has Always Been Done That Way
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Rules and procedures help us, they help us because they stop us from having to think. Providing the rules are stuck to, and the procedures are followed then a fairly consistent output can be expected, and this decreases the risk of a disaster from happening. They also contribute towards shaping the culture of an organisation. On occasion rules and procedures need to be evaluated, some rules may be in place due to legislation. Have you ever questioned why something is done within an organisation a particular way because you don't fully understand why it is done that way, only to get a response like '_I'm not entirely sure, we've just always done it that way_'. When an idea for improvement is challenged by something that has always been done a certain way, you might just want to check is it actually required? Does it need to be performed as it is, or can there be room for negotiating a better solution?

# Conclusion
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Ask better questions, challenge rules and procedures that prohibit improvements, experiment and avoid dumb incentives. For more reading on agile retrospectives I'd highly recommend checking out [Agile Retrospectives - Making Good Teams Great](https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Agile-Retrospectives-Making-Teams-Great-Pragmatic-Programmers/0977616649)' by '_Esther Derby_' and '_Diana Larsen_'

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">As always, thanks for making it this far. If you have read this and found any of it insightful, thought provoving, useful at all?! Or know someone that might? Then feel free to share.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Do you agree with any of it? Do you have any of your own tips, or experiences? Share your thoughts, let me know in the comments below. 
