---
layout: post
title:  "Improving The Daily Scrum"
date:   2017-15-09 15:00:00
categories:
tags:
image: /assets/article_images/2017-15-09-daily-scrum/daily-scrum.jpg
image2: /assets/article_images/2017-15-09-daily-scrum/daily-scrum-mobile.jpg
---
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
There was once a scrum team, who worked well together, they were always looking out for ways to improve the way they work. Everyday they'd get together and have their daily scrum. One day that question got asked "Can we improve our daily scrum?". Because of that, during their retrospective they started to brainstorm ideas to come up with ways they could improve. They soon started trying some of those ideas, some worked well, some didn't. We can all learn from our own mistakes, and from others - and so I've decided to write and share some of my views, and experiences (good and bad), along with going over other common problems that can occur with the daily scrum, and adding in some unsolicited (but hopefully useful) advice based on what I, and the teams that I have worked with have found to be useful.</span>

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Let's jump straight in and look at some examples:</span>

# Stuck in the Command Centre
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
Does this question sound familiar "There is only four of us in our scrum team, is there any real need for us to all stand up for the daily scrum?". When I hear this type of question, it always reminds me of a poster I once saw at a Dental practice. It was a picture of a young boy, asking a Dentist a question. The boy asks "Do I have to brush my teeth?". The Dentist's reply was "No, only the ones you want to keep". Similarly, If you want to utilise the benefits of having scrum, then ALL the ceremonies need to be implemented properly. If you're the type of person that started work in jobs that required a lot of physical demand, but have since made a transition into getting an office job. Then you'll will know that feeling, that one where you finally get that job that's going to pay you, whilst you're sat down all day. "What? You're going to pay me to sit on my ass all day, and press buttons on a computer?", "correct". Ok, I get it, it's nice having a job that you're able to do whilst you're sat down. It's even better when you have everything you need right at your grasp, big screen, headphones, wireless mouse and one of those fancy black spinny chairs with the arm rests. In all, it's like your own little command centre. However, apart from the health related problems that incur as a result of being sat down most of the day, there is another downside, and that is team members can struggle to get up out of their chairs and leave that command centre to stand up for a daily scrum.</span>

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;"> Having a team that doesn't want to stand up for the daily scrum, isn't a major issue. In fact, it might even work well for some teams? However, I think in most cases the whole team would benefit if all of team members stood up for the daily scrum, as it helps focus, and with keeping things brief. When I've seen scrum not working as well as it should, the issues are often subtle. The root cause typically comes down to us, the people, our behaviour and our understanding of scrum. To fix this, I'd recommend spending time coaching the scrum team, and organisation if necessary on how scrum needs to be adopted. Start by reminding, or enlightening them all of the key benefits of scrum, and how the ceremonies and their subtleties compliment each other. I believe that this plays such a key part of scrum being able to work successfully. It some cases, it may also payoff to illustrate the consequences of not implementing the scrum ceremonies successfully, and the impact that that can have, since they are very much dependent upon one another - the real aim here is to get the scrum team, and organisation to really understand the WHY,  and to buy into the fact that the ceremonies are there to help make things easier.</span>


# Training Olympic Athletes
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
Does your scrum team have members that like to use a stopwatch during the daily scrum? If so, can I ask why? Please tell me that it's not being used to time each team member, giving them each an allocated time of x mins to complete their update? I hope not! I'd say that being mindful of the time, and keeping an eye on it is important, and it is certainly something that should be monitored in some way. However, if you are spending more than 2-3 minutes per team member when they are providing their updates, then perhaps there is an opportunity there for the team to learn more about the purpose of the daily scrum, and how it should be adopted. Not allowing a team member to finish their sentence just because they exceed a set time limit threshold by a matter of seconds, I think, is a little too strict and an unnecessary control. It shouldn't be so much about the time, but more so about the content. It's not a race to get the daily scrum finished as soon as possible. I mean, despite it being a key part of a SPRINT it's not exactly what the name suggests. How are you supposed to have an environment that allows free flow of dialogue amongst the team, if those team members are being cut off mid sentence? STOPWATCH your doing, don't race the pace, encourage conversation if it's relative and stick to the outlined agenda, then time shouldn't be an issue.</span>


# Scrum Soldiers
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
Have you ever heard suggestions to help keep the daily scrum brief that sound like this "All team members should stand up on one leg for the entire daily scrum"? Or worse, "Hey, let's all get into a planking position for that daily scrum". Ok first, who's coming up with these ideas? Second, easy there tough guy, you may well think that you're a hard bodied, hairy chested, rootin tootin, shootin, parachutin, demolition double cap, crimpin frogman - but all we need from right now, is what did yesterday, what have you got going on today, and is there anything blocking you? Neuroscience may have proven that engaging in a physical exercise regime helps improve your memory, brain health and physical fitness, etc. That may well be true, in my view and experience, physical exercise regimes deserve their own time and attention, if you want them to work successfully, and shouldn't be something that you try and incorporate into your daily scrum. I also believe, that every degree that your physical demand increases, then the chances are that your mental ability is likely to decrease. I know I've been told a MILLION times before not to exaggerate, and the following comparison might be a far fetched example but still - have you ever tried doing advance algebra whilst running on a treadmill? Probably not, and neither have I. But, I'd still put money on it that it's not easy.</span>


# Using a Marker Pen
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
This is actually an idea I'd recommend as I found it works well. I'll admit when it was first suggested, I was slightly hesitant. The idea sounded a bit like we were going to start documenting meeting notes for the daily scrum. However, using a marker pen is not as bad as it may first sound. This generally works well with both; new and mature teams. It contributes towards everyone keeping focus during the daily scrum, it can help visually identify dependencies and keep the agenda of the daily scrum on track. For this you'll need a board to write on and a marker pen. Whoever has the marker pen provides the team with their update, scribbling down perhaps just a subject heading of their update for each section of the daily scrum agenda: (Yesterday, Today, Blockers). When they're finished with their update, they simply pass the marker to another team member in a clockwise motion until everyone in the team are finished. As the marker pen is rotated amongst the team, I've found that it can help avoid that common issue amongst new scrum teams, whereby they look upon the Scrum Master to decide who get's to speak next? If the teams updates are left on the board, then the next day it can act as a gentle reminder to everyone, this saves having to remember what everyone said the day before and makes it easy pick up where you left off.</span>

# Conclusion
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
If there is at least one shared purpose of a scrum team that I think everyone can agree on, it is that they should always try to improve the way they work. Participating and trying to accomplish that equally shared purpose of finding out what really works best. There are always room for improvements, and I believe that this is something that everyone in the scrum team should be responsible for - that all being said, don't be put off from trying new innovative ways to improve, and don't be discouraged to take action. Remember the challenge should be to find out what works best for the team whilst aiming to actually do something that can make a positive, significant and sustainable difference.</span>

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
Thanks for making it this far. If you have read this and found any of it useful at all, or know someone that might? Then feel free to share.</span>

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 20px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">
That pretty much sums it up. Do you agree with any of it? Do you have any of your own tips/experiences with improving the daily scrum? Let me know in the comments below.</span>
