---
layout: post
title:  "Greasing The Wheels On Facilitation"
date: 2018-05-11 19:27:00
categories:
tags:
image: /assets/article_images/2018-05-11-greasing-the-wheels-on-facilitation/facilitation.jpg
image2: /assets/article_images/2018-05-11-greasing-the-wheels-on-facilitation/facilitation-mobile.jpg
---


<span style="color:#00000; text-align: justify; font-family: 'open sans'; text-align: 'justify'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The ability to effectively facilitate groups of individuals that are all fully engaged for the purpose of making decisions collaboratively, is commonly recognised as being a fundamental skill for any Scrum Master and is a key element to the success of building a functional, high performing Scrum team - _why is facilitation considered to be so important for a Scrum Master?_, _what are some of the challenges found in facilitating?_, and _what might help with these challenges?_ These are some of the questions that I'll be exploring. There are many parts to facilitation so I'll cover parts that I think are worth mentioning. If you're after more information about the topic of facilitation, then there are links at the bottom that will hopefully, be as useful to you as they have been for me.

<span style="color:#00000; text-align: justify; font-family: 'open sans'; text-align: 'justify'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">I can't emphasise enough on the importance of facilitation and if you're a Scrum Master or an Agile Coach, you'll only know too well. If you're just starting out as a Scrum Master or considering it? Then I'd highly recommend engaging within the Scrum community for more information on this topic (or indeed for most Scrum related topics). Generally, the Scrum community are a nice bunch to mix with and they like sharing experiences and knowledge, these practical perspectives can be extremely useful.

# Facilitation Isn't Easy
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">No doubt, you've seen great facilitation outside of the world of Agile. If you have ever been in a meeting, workshop, or any kind of group gathering that went smoothly with a successful outcome, perhaps even thought to yourself afterwards '_Well, that was easy_'. If so, then there is a good chance that it had a good facilitator that made it feel easy. After all, the word _'facil'_ in Spanish translates to '_easy_', deriving from the Latin word '_facilis_'. That's not to say facilitation is easy- it's not. In fact, one of the things I've discovered since being a Scrum Master is that the journey towards becoming a good facilitator- is one of the biggest challenges found in communication and collaboration.
# Collaboration Is Nothing New
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">You'll often hear the word '_collaborate_', being said in software development. But what does '_collaborate_' mean? I think, in the bluntest sense it just means '_work together_'. Which is nothing new of course, since we've been working collectively in groups since the beginning of our existence, and to a large extent our ability to collaborate has contributed towards our success as a species.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">'_Only by working together are we able to fully account for the emergence and timing of unique features of Homo sapiens and how humans, evolved through natural processes, resulted in a spectacular anomaly among living species_.' - **Kim Hill** (professor anthropologist)

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">In may seem obvious to have groups of people working together in a team in order to accomplish something that would be otherwise difficult if everyone acted as separate individuals, and it might also seem logical for a team to practice as a team, so that they can improve working together over time. Take sport teams for example, they all typically spend hours of their time practising together to improve how they work as a team. In the British Army (and most likely all armies), small teams of soldiers (sections) practically collaborate constantly, in order to accomplish their objectives. They might use terms such as '_mucking in_', instead of '_collaborating_', and refer to someone as '_jacking_', when they're not collaborating. But essentially, they're working together and typically improve how they work together over time.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">One of the main reasons why, I think, collaboration is heard and echoed so much in software development today is that, the success of software is usually based on the outcome that occurs after it's been shipped. This means that it becomes paramount for those at the team level to collaborate with their organisations higher strategic objectives, as well as with customers and users to understand their needs and challenges. Generally speaking, any Agile team that collaborates well, keeps their work transparent and through effective facilitation and are able to advantage of making effective decisions that are driven by the collective knowledge of the team. By collaborating they have the ability to make decisions about their work and their commitment that is based on their abilities. This type of transparency coupled with good communication and effective facilitation, helps each individual on the team align collectively to focus their efforts on a single point, for example, building valuable solution for users, or completing a Sprint goal.

# Good Communication Is Essential
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">My overall view is that collaborating depends on good communication amongst a team, having a free flow of meaning in conversations allows for a better understanding of each others perspectives, ideas and opinions. If individuals of a team find it difficult to communicate with one another, then that's when the wheels start falling off and it's very likely, that it will impact their agility and effectiveness as a team.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">'_Most Conversations Are Simply Monologues Delivered in the Presence of a Witness'_- **Margaret Millar** (perhaps, **Mark Twain**?!)

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The need for good communication and collaboration are clear. Being a facilitator can help with promoting and nurturing a safe environment for communication, which is a must for any type of Agile team. This probably all sounds obvious and straight forward. However, what isn't always obvious, are the types of obstacles (impediments) that prevent communication from working effectively and how facilitation can help, which I'll come back to in minute.

# Scrum Master Facilitation Is Not
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">I recently read an interesting article by [Tobias Mayer](http://tobiasmayer.uk/), that explores the topic of collaboration. In this article ([Collaboration: the art of letting go](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/collaboration-art-letting-go-tobias-mayer/)), Tobias explores this topic and doesn't start with an explanation to what he thinks collaboration is- instead, he starts by offering specific examples of what collaboration is NOT. Perhaps, when it comes to exploring something that is commonly misunderstood or misused, then it might be better for us to start with first, defining what that 'something' isn't. After all, we're probably more likely to understand and resonate with something that we already recognise.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">_'It is far from easy, and there is a great deal of mind-trickery that tells us we are collaborating when in fact we are coercing, manipulating, managing, shaping, colluding, controlling, seeking compliance and perhaps even sulking to get our own way. True collaboration is a rare bird of paradise, seldom seen, and when discovered often shot._'- **Tobias Mayer**

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Starting my Scrum Master journey from being a Project Manager in software development and a Paratrooper before that, I have had to adjust quite a bit in terms of my mindset and what I originally thought a good facilitator should be doing. In the journey of me transitioning, I have learnt that facilitation for a Scrum Master is NOT:

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Typing and updating tickets in JIRA, Pivotal Tracker, or any other kind of software tool.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Solely about facilitating at the team level, but also the Product Owner and those at the wider Organisation level.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Telling a Scrum team what tools, techniques, methodologies and practices they should be using (suggestions for a team new to Scrum is fine).
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Being the one standing at the front and demonstrating the completed work during a Sprint Review.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Creating a list of actions for a Scrum team based on your own interpretation of collected data from a Sprint during a Retrospective.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Preaching about what it says in 'The Scrum Guide'.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Assigning tasks to members of the Scrum team.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Being known as the note taker for the Scrum team.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Just chit chatting about the teams feelings during a Retrospective.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Running Daily Scrums as if there were report meetings.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Telling the Scrum team what their plan should be for improving.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Have I mentioned what it says in the 'The Scrum Guide?'

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The '_Scrum Master facilitation is NOT preaching about what it says in 'The Scrum Guide_', I'd actually go as far in saying that I'd avoid dropping the words 'The Scrum Guide' or even 'Agile', from most interactions at work. Particularly when you're trying to get a point across or explain something. That goes for the Scrum team, Product Owner or someone within the organisation and especially stakeholders. In my experience, nothing falls quicker on deaf ears than a preaching Scrum Master reciting words from a 19-page guide book. Instead, I'd recommend using a real life examples, some kind of story, a form of metaphor or analogy.

# Neutral Position
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;"><span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Being a good facilitator is the bread and butter for any Scrum Master, part of the role is to service the Product Owner and Development Team by '_Facilitating Scrum events as requested or needed_'. Which sounds straight forward and in theory it is since the outcomes from each of Scrum event in the Scrum Guide are clear. However, what I find interesting about the '_Scrum Master facilitation is NOT solely about facilitating at the team level, but also the Product Owner and those at the wider Organisation level_', is that here are many circumstances where a Scrum Master might want to to experiment and facilitate in a slightly different way (not just in the Scrum events), perhaps to incorporate a new, different activity or method to help reach a wider audience or to achieve a better outcome. I don't see there being anything wrong in getting feedback on this either. I mean, in the spirit of modelling positive behaviour shouldn't the act of experimentation be recognised as being part of a pragmatic approach to your own efforts in becoming better in your role, isn't that what you'd expect from a team too?


<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;"><span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Scrum Masters shouldn't just be facilitating the Scrum events, occasionally they will get asked to help facilitate something for the organisation, which could entail considerations such as:

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">What are the desired outcomes?
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Who will be attending (C-Levels, Stakeholders, Investors)?
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Will any attendees be attending remotely?
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">What are the attendees expectations?
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Who needs to know the results of the outcome?
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Where will it be held?
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">What is the expected duration?

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">In addition to the Scrum events, what I think facilitation for a Scrum Master SHOULD be about:

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Ice breaking activities for new teams or members.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Integrating multiple frames of references.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Nurturing relationships between team members, Product Owner and in others within the organisation.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Guiding structured discussions about product and processes.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Assisting the team in divergent and convergent thinking.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Aiding with conflict resolution.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Group decision-making.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Internal and external collaboration meetings.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Applying basic ground rules in facilitation.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Integrating Scrum into the organisation.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">For me, facilitating as a Scrum Master is about staying in a neutral position, understanding the desired outcome of each event and being able to smoothly transition the team from A to B whilst keeping things on track, encouraging conversations to flow without letting things deviate too much from the desired outcome.

# Facilitating Scrum Events
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Some great examples of the type of characteristics that each Scrum event should have, I like what '_**Barry Overeem**_' offers in his post [The Scrum Master As A Facilitator](http://www.barryovereem.com/the-scrum-master-as-a-facilitator/). He describes the characteristics of well-facilitated Scrum events:
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**The Daily Scrum** contains an atmosphere where healthy peer pressure occurs on delivery quality, commitment and addressing impediments;
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**The Sprint Planning** is all about collaboration between the Product Owner and the Development team and has a strong focus on delivering business value. All team members understand the work and jointly agree to achieve the sprint goal;
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**The Sprint Review** is an energising event in which the Scrum team, sponsors and stakeholders together inspect the product increment and backlog. But also retrospect their collaboration and how this can be improved. They act as one team with the same purpose, there are no barriers between ‘client’ and ‘supplier’;
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**The Retrospective** is done in a safe atmosphere in which ‘the elephant in the room’ is addressed, discussed and turned into actionable improvements that the team members agree upon realising in the next sprint.

# Psychological Environment
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Coming back to 'what isn't always obvious are the types of obstacles (impediments) that prevent communication from working effectively and how facilitation can help'- one of the main challenges is usually the environment from a psychological perspective, it has to be psychologically safe. Not just that, if the culture of the organisation suffers from dysfunctions that diminish the levels of trust and respect needed for truthful conversations, then it is likely that part of this will have trickled down into the team layer level and could be embedded within the Scrum team. If that's the case, then team members might not want to risk communicating what they really think. I mean, who wants to suggest an idea and get laughed at, or not be taken seriously? Is it easier for team members too just to succumb to the HIPPO (highest paid persons opinion) in the room, or conform to the most dominate member of the team for the sake of ease and conflict avoidance?

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">_'Positive emotions like trust, curiosity, confidence, and inspiration broaden the mind and help us build psychological, social, and physical resources. We become more open-minded, resilient, motivated, and persistent when we feel safe. Humour increases, as does solution-finding and divergent thinking — the cognitive process underlying creativity_'.- **Barbara L. Fredrickson**

# Physical Environment
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Another impediment that could be preventing effective communication might be physically related, for example, air conditioning of the rooms, room size, lack of natural daylight, external noises and interferences, etc. Having distributed team members can present it's challenges too, although this might work well for some, others (probably most) find this difficult due to differences in time zones, lag time between responses and loss of information that usually gets subtly conveyed when speaking with someone face to face.

# Biases & Negative Attitudes
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Other impediments might be found more in the context of conversations, for example, the surfacing of preconceived notions, negative attitudes, assumptions, inferences and biases can all make achieving the desired outcome as a team difficult. I try and '_spot the biases_', almost like a game that I play in my head. I consciously try and make an effort to be more attentive and aware of any judgements being made that are based on a personal points of view (including my own). I observe and listen out for biases in conversations and in the decisions that are being made. To do this has meant that I have had to constantly remind myself, to be quiet and listen more, sometimes resist breaking silence (usually at the very point at which I want to speak up or intervene). For anyone who has ever met me, will know, that this is an achievement of itself. Here are a few biases that I typically come across or have otherwise just found interesting:

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Status quo bias** The tendency to like things to stay relatively the same.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Empathy gap** The tendency to underestimate the influence or strength of feelings, in either oneself or others.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Confirmation bias** The tendency to search for, interpret, favour, and recall information in a way that confirms one's pre-existing beliefs or hypotheses.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**IKEA effect** The tendency for people to place a disproportionately high value on objects that they partially assembled themselves, such as furniture from IKEA, regardless of the quality of the end result.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Irrational escalation** The tendency to refer to a situation in which people can make irrational decisions based upon rational decisions in the past or to justify actions already taken.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Dunning–Kruger effect** The tendency for unskilled individuals to overestimate their own ability and the tendency for experts to underestimate their own ability.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Focusing effect** The tendency to place too much importance on one aspect of an event.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Framing effect** The tendency to react to a particular choice in different ways depending on how it is presented.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Social desirability** The tendency of survey respondents to answer questions in a manner that will be viewed favourably by others.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Courtesy bias** The tendency to give an opinion that is more socially correct than one's true opinion, to avoid offending anyone.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Knowledge bias** The tendency to unknowingly assume that the others have the background to understand.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Illusion of control** The tendency to overestimate one's degree of influence over other external events.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Planning fallacy** The tendency to underestimate task-completion times.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Not to worry too much about biases. I mean, we all have them at times and the science on this is clear- if you’re a human, then your brain operates through biases. Being aware and making the team aware of biases, assumptions (taking for granted something that is true, that has not yet been verified) and inferences (making a conclusion about something that is not known, based on something that is known), can help towards making sure that 'value' stays defined by the ultimate customer, and that pointless, expensive, full on features aren't build just because we all assumed that we knew what the customer wanted. As a rule of thumb, in software development- customers don't know what they want, they know what they want once you show to them.

# Team Dysfunctions
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;"><span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">By being that somebody (the facilitator) that's in a neutral position, you're in a far better position to be able to; observe the behaviours and interactions of the team, notice how each member communicates and whether they're actually collaborating. Working on identifying and rectifying team dysfunctions based on **Patrick Lencioni's** - [The Five Dysfunctions of a Team](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Five-Dysfunctions-Team-Leadership-Lencioni/dp/0787960756), if you're not already doing so, I've found that it's a good place to start:

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Absence of Trust**
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Fear of Conflict**
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Lack of Commitment**
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Avoidance of Accountability**
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**Inattention to Results**

# 言語の問題 (Language Difficulties)
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">There can be impediments associated with languages difficulties, regional dialects or proficiency in a certain language. Using jargon or slang words can sometimes be confusing for some people due to generation gaps. Not having enough common experiences can also limit somebody's understanding of a discussion, especially if there are lot of stories or examples that are frequently being used to convey information.

# Conclusion
<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Being able to work as a team successfully will often come down to how well individuals on that team respond to the methods that the team are using to work together- these methods ideally should be reviewed and evaluated by the team regularly. To avoid biases and encourage engagement from everyone on the team to make effective group decisions, having someone in neutral position to effectively facilitate this, helps ensure a smooth process and generally a much better outcome.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;"><span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Having some basic ground rules when it comes to facilitating can help promote positive behaviours that should improve overall group discussions. These basic ground rules can act as a modelling tool to exhibit desired group behaviour, they can also help with knowing when to intervene as a facilitator, as you're able to identify negative behaviours and general unhelpful group behaviour within the team- examples of some basic ground rules include:

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Test assumptions and Inferences.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Keeps things transparent.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Be specific.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Explain reasoning and intent.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Focus on the interests rather than positions (solutions).
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Combining advocacy and inquiry.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Decisions should be made by the team.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Agree to address (if necessary) any uncomfortable issues.
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Always strive to improve your facilitation skills.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Remember to get feedback on your facilitation, why not? Much like how a good agile team operates through the transparency of their work, inspecting product feedback and their processes regularly, then adapting to make improvements overtime to their processes and product.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">As usual, I’ve stumbled across a whole heap of great material whilst writing this, so if you’re after more information on the subject of facilitation, then I’d recommend checking these out:

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The Skilled Facilitator Field book - by [Roger Schwarz](https://www.wiley.com/en-us/The+Skilled+Facilitator+Fieldbook%3A+Tips%2C+Tools%2C+and+Tested+Methods+for+Consultants%2C+Facilitators%2C+Managers%2C+Trainers%2C+and+Coaches-p-9780787964948)
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Productive Conversations - [Systems Thinker](https://thesystemsthinker.com/productive-conversations-using-advocacy-and-inquiry-effectively/)
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Tobias Mayer, untangler- [Tobias Mayer](http://tobiasmayer.uk/)
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The Five Dysfunctions of a Team - by [Patrick Lencioni](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Five-Dysfunctions-Team-Leadership-Lencioni/dp/0787960756)
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The Liberators- [Barry Overeem](http://www.barryovereem.com/)
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Early Humans Used Brain Power, Innovation and Teamwork to Dominate the Planet - [Scientific American](https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/humans-brain-power-origins/)
- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Scrum Clinics -  [Tobias Mayer, Scrum Clinics](http://tobiasmayer.uk/scrum/smclinics)


<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Thanks if you’ve made it this far down the page, perhaps you’ve just skipped it all- in any case, if you have read this and found any of it thought-provoking, dare I say even useful at all, or know someone that might? Then feel free to share.

<span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">Do you have anything to add or share? Share your thoughts, let me know in the comments below or give me a shout on other social platforms.
