---
layout: post
title:  "Review: The Starfish and the Spider"
date: 2019-12-01 17:47:00
categories:
tags:
image: /assets/article_images/2019-12-01-review-the-starfish-and-the-spider/starfish.jpg
image2: /assets/article_images/2019-12-01-review-the-starfish-and-the-spider/starfish-mobile.jpg
---

<span style="color:#00000; text-align: justify; font-family: 'open sans'; text-align: 'justify'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">**The Starfish and the Spider:** _the unstoppable power of leaderless organisations / Orid Brafman and Rod A. Beckstrom_.

<span style="color:#00000; text-align: justify; font-family: 'open sans'; text-align: 'justify'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The Starfish and the Spider takes a looks at the rise and fall of organisations due to their structural differences, and how the choice of different leadership styles play a part in an organisations longevity. Authors, Orid Brafman and Rod A. Beckstrom have done an incredible job at exploring centralised and decentralised organisations and not just from a modern day perspective, in fact the book kicks-off with a rather interesting tale involving MCM entertainment company, Spanish conquistadors and the Apaches.

<span style="color:#00000; text-align: justify; font-family: 'open sans'; text-align: 'justify'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">One question it looks at answering is 'What happens when organisations with different structures go head to head?' - for example, the revolutionary change of how the vast majority of the music market share was once dominated by just a handful of big organisations, then in 2001 we saw the arrival of Napster which was based on using peer 2 peer software in order to share music on MP3 format. No longer were there people queuing up to buy the latest CD from music shops, instead they started to simply download music straight from the internet. This revolutionised the way in which music was created and made available, driving the big organisations to revise their business models and in some cases they went bankrupt as a result of them not being able to adapt in time to such a sudden change in the market - as one of the principles described in the book, when it comes to decentralisation '_as industries become decentralised, overall profits decrease_'.

<span style="color:#00000; text-align: justify; font-family: 'open sans'; text-align: 'justify'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">When you first look into that makes a successful and powerful organisation, you might immediately think that such organisations have a well-disciplined hierarchy with strong traditional leadership. I mean, what happens when there is no traditional leadership, no command and control within an organisation? Surely, magnitudes of chaos and disorder would inevitable prevail and getting work done would just run a muck.. Right? Not necessarily - in fact, some organisations are able to thrive and even flourish due to their, let's say, opposing centralised formation.

<span style="color:#00000; text-align: justify; font-family: 'open sans'; text-align: 'justify'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">After reading this book, it has made me wonder more about how organisations are structured and if there are any signs of major disruption for these organisations on the horizon. It seems to me that there is definitely room for modern day organisations to explore and consider taking on a starfish like structure, especially if it involves technology. You only have to look at the rise of blockchain and the capabilities of this technology, and not just blockchain, but technology in general and the many alternative ways in which work can be carried out. I think, we're now at the frontier of reshaping how modern day organisations form and operate, thus introducing a whole new, interesting world of social and economic innovation.

- <span style="color:#00000; font-family: 'open sans'; font-size: 1em; font-size: 18px; font-weight: 200; hyphens: none;">The Starfish and the Spider: the unstoppable power of leaderless organisations - by [Orid Brafman and Rod A. Beckstrom](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Starfish-Spider-Unstoppable-Leaderless-Organizations/dp/1591841836)
